The symbol  sine A is used as an abbreviation for 'the sine of the angle A'.  sine A is not the product of 'sin' and A. 'sin' separated from A has no meaning. Similarly,  cos A is not the product of 'cos' and A. Similar interpretations follow for other trigonometric ratios also.

Now, if we take a point P on the hypotenuse A C or a point Q on A C extended, of the right triangle ABC and draw PM perpendicular to AB and QN perpendicular to AB extended (see Fig. 8.6), how


will the trigonometric ratios of  angle  A in  angle  PAM differ from those of  angle  A in  angle  CAB or from those of  angle  A in

Fig. 8.6  angle  QAN?

To answer this, first look at these triangles. Is  triangle  PAM similar to  triangle  CAB? From Chapter 6, recall the AA similarity criterion. Using the criterion, you will see that the triangles PAM and CAB are similar. Therefore, by the property of similar triangles, the corresponding sides of the triangles are proportional.

So, we have


AM ,by AB,=AP ,by AC,=MP ,by BC, .






 next column,  From this, we find   
MP ,by AP,  next column, =BC ,by AC,= sine A
  next column,  Similarly,   AM ,by AP,=AB ,by AC,= cos A, MP ,by AM,=BC ,by AB,= tan A  and so on. 



This shows that the trigonometric ratios of angle A in  angle  PAM not differ from those of angle A in  angle  CAB.

In the same way, you should check that the value of  sine A (and also of other trigonometric ratios) remains the same in  angle  QAN also.

From our observations, it is now clear that the values of the trigonometric ratios of an angle do not vary with the lengths of the sides of the triangle, if the angle remains the same.

Note : For the sake of convenience, we may write  sine  squared  A,  cos  squared  A, etc., in place of ( sine A) squared ,( cos A) squared , etc., respectively. But cosec A=( sine A) inverse   not equal to   sine  inverse  A (it is called sine inverse A).  sine  inverse  A has a different meaning, which will be discussed in higher classes. Similar conventions hold for the other trigonometric ratios as well. Sometimes, the Greek letter  (theta) is also used to denote an angle.

We have defined six trigonometric ratios of an acute angle. If we know any one of the ratios, can we obtain the other ratios? Let us see.



B C is equal to k, then AC will be 3 k, where

Fig. 8.7 k is any positive number. To determine other

trigonometric ratios for the angle A, we need to find the length of the third side AB. Do you remember the Pythagoras theorem? Let us use it to determine the required length AB.


AB squared =AC squared -BC squared =(3 k) squared -(k) squared =8 k squared =(2  square root of 2, k) squared 


Therefore,


AB= plus or minus  2  square root of 2, k


So, we get


AB=2  square root of 2, k   (Why is  AB  not -2  square root of 2, k  ?) 


Now,


 cos A=AB ,by AC,=2  square root of 2, k ,by 3 k,=2  square root of 2, ,by 3,


Similarly, you can obtain the other trigonometric ratios of the angle A.